Mets updates (#207)
OCR-D/spec: mets.md

# Requirements on handling METS/PAGE

OCR-D has decided to base its data exchange format on [METS](http://www.loc.gov/standards/mets/). This document defines a set of conventions and mechanism for using METS files within OCR-D. The basis for this is the METS Application Profile
for digitised media by the [DFG-Viewer](http://dfg-viewer.de/) (current version: [2.3.1](http://dfg-viewer.de/fileadmin/groups/dfgviewer/METS-Anwendungsprofil_2.3.1.pdf)).

For layout and text recognition results, the primary exchange format in OCR-D is [PAGE](https://github.com/OCR-D/PAGE-XML). Conventions for PAGE are outlined in [a separate document](page).

## 1) Metadata

<a id="unique-id-for-the-document-processed"/>
### 1.1 Unique ID for the document processed

> METS provided to the MP must be uniquely addressable within the global library community.

Reviewer: Yeah, that is pretty old and was not that easy to understand even when it was accurate.

* `purl`
* `urn`
* `handle`
* `url`

<a id="always-use-url-or-relative-filenames"/>
### 1.2 Always use URL or relative filenames

Always use URL, except for files located in the directory or any subdirectories of the METS file.

#### Example

```sh
/tmp/foo/ws1
├── mets.xml
├── foo.tif
└── foo.xml
```

Valid `mets:FLocat/@xlink:href` in `/tmp/foo/ws1/mets.xml`:
* `foo.xml`
* `foo.tif`
* `file://foo.tif`

Invalid `mets:FLocat/@xlink:href` in `/tmp/foo/ws1/mets.xml`:
* `/tmp/foo/ws1/foo.xml` (absolute path)
* `file:///tmp/foo/ws1/foo.tif` (file URL scheme with absolute path)
* `file:///foo.tif` (relative path written as absolute path)

<a id="recording-processing-information-in-mets"/>
### 1.3 Recording processing information in METS

Processors should add information to the METS metadata header to indicate that
they changed the METS. This information is mainly for human consumption to get
an overview of the software agents involved in the METS file's creation. More
detailed or machine-actionable provenance information is outside the scope of

> the processor.

Reviewer: > ...outside the scope of the processor, or just the spec?

This goes way back to 2018 and then meant "the module projects do not have to implement this".

These days I tend to run processors or `ocrd process` with `|tee <name-of-processor>.log` to retain the logs. Not actionable but more complete than either the `mets:agent` we add to METS or the `pc:processingSteps` we add to PAGE-XML, the latter being pretty close to being machine-actionable in the sense that they have the complete set of parameters.

We could add at least the `processingStep` mechanism to the specifications.

> the processor.

Author: > We could add at least the processingStep mechanism to the specifications.

+1

`<mets:fileGrp USE="OCR-D-GT-SEG-WORD">`   | Word segmentation ground truth
`<mets:fileGrp USE="OCR-D-GT-SEG-GLYPH">`  | Glyph segmentation ground truth

### 3.2 File Group `@USE="FULLDOWNLOAD_..."`

For `mets:file` entries representative of the publication **as a whole**, the `ID` attribute MUST have  prefix `FULLDOWNLOAD_`, followed by the file format (`TEI`, `ALTO`, `hOCR`, `HTML`, `TXT`, `COCO`, `PDF`).

These entries SHOULD be referenced in the [structMap](#ocr-d-structmap) under `/mets:mets/mets:structMap[@TYPE="PHYSICAL"]/mets:fptr`.

#### Example
`<mets:file ID>` | ID of the file for OCR-D
--               | --
`<mets:file ID="FULLDOWNLOAD_TEI"  MIMETYPE="application/tei+xml">`            | The digitised publication or book in TEI format.

> `<mets:file ID="FULLDOWNLOAD_TEI_01"  MIMETYPE="application/pdf">`            | The digitised publication or book in TEI format. Version one.

Reviewer 2: typo?
MIMETYPE="application/pdf" ->MIMETYPE="application/tei+xml"

Reviewer: https://github.com/OCR-D/spec/pull/207/commits/e8584024ffd6539a5f6d462bb1ec0ac836729300

> `<mets:file ID="FULLDOWNLOAD_TEI_02"  MIMETYPE="application/tei+xml">`            | The digitised publication or book in TEI format, a second Version.

Reviewer: @tboenig this should reflect your proposal with regards to file groups containing full-work content.

Reviewer 3: @kba could you move section 3.2 to 4.3?

Reviewer: f3bd06b

`<mets:fileGrp USE="OCR-D-GT-SEG-WORD">`   | Word segmentation ground truth
`<mets:fileGrp USE="OCR-D-GT-SEG-GLYPH">`  | Glyph segmentation ground truth

### 3.2 File Group `@USE="FULLDOWNLOAD_..."`

For `mets:file` entries representative of the publication **as a whole**, the `ID` attribute MUST have  prefix `FULLDOWNLOAD_`, followed by the file format (`TEI`, `ALTO`, `hOCR`, `HTML`, `TXT`, `COCO`, `PDF`).

These entries SHOULD be referenced in the [structMap](#ocr-d-structmap) under `/mets:mets/mets:structMap[@TYPE="PHYSICAL"]/mets:div/mets:fptr` (i.e. the top-level `mets:div` element).

They MAY reside in the same `mets:fileGrp` as per-page files of the same type, or in a separate one.

#### Example
`<mets:file ID>` | ID of the file for OCR-D
--               | --
`<mets:file ID="FULLDOWNLOAD_TEI"  MIMETYPE="application/tei+xml">`            | The digitised publication or book in TEI format.

> `<mets:file ID="FULLDOWNLOAD_TEI_01"  MIMETYPE="application/pdf">`            | The digitised publication or book in TEI format. Version one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`<mets:file ID="FULLDOWNLOAD_TEI_01"  MIMETYPE="application/tei+xml">`            | The digitised publication or book in TEI format. Version one.
```

</mets:structMap>
```

### 5.2 OCR-D `mets:structMap`

A METS may contain different `mets:structMap` entries, differentiated by their `TYPE` attribute (e.g. `LOGICAL`, `PHYSICAL, ...`). 
* A `mets:structMap` with `TYPE="PHYSICAL"` is mandatory.
* The _logical_ document structure detected by _library or archive_ MUST be described by `TYPE="LOGICAL"`.
* The _logical_ document structure detected by _OCR-D software_ MUST be described by `TYPE="OCR-D-LOGICAL"`.

attributes in `structMap` | description
--                        | --
`LABEL` | contains the recognized text of a structuring component, e.g. the title of a chapter
`TYPE` | contains the type of a structuring component according to some standardized, controlled vocabulary (see [DFG-Viewer: structural data set](https://dfg-viewer.de/strukturdatenset/)), e.g. `chapter`

## 6) Ranges of pages `mets:structLink`

> The `mets:structLink` describes the ranges of pages in part of a document.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `mets:structLink` describes the ranges of pages in parts of a document 
by linking `mets:div` elements of the logical `mets:structMap` to `mets:div` elements of the  physical `mets:structMap`.
```
